testdata/simulated-data/README.md, before:

# Making simulated PLINK data

## 1 - Software

In order to simulate PLINK files, one can use PLINK1:
https://zzz.bwh.harvard.edu/plink/simulate.shtml

Important considerations:
- All SNPs simulated are unlinked and in linkage equilibrium.
- This tool only generates individuals drawn from a homogeneous population (but see link for tip on how to get around that)
- You can also use PLINK to simulate summary statistics directly

## 2 - Commands used

To produce additional test for this pipeline, the following commands were used:

```
#### 1 -  Obtain PLINK1 docker image ####

$ docker pull lifebitai/plink1:latest

#### 2 -  Make a wgas.sim file and simulate data ####

# Here, we want to simulate 2200 SNPs (100 per chromosome) for 112 individuals (7 cases, 105 controls)
# These numbers should make it easier for me to split the data and use the current pheno file I have used for testing the pipeline.

# Use the Docker image to easily run PLINK
$ pwd
# [...]testdata/simulated-data
$ docker run --rm -it -v "$PWD":"$PWD" -w "$PWD" -e HOME=$PWD” --user "$(id -u):$(id -g)" lifebitai/plink1:latest

$ plink --simulate original-simulated-plink/wgas.sim --simulate-ncases 7 --simulate-ncontrols 105 --out original-simulated-plink/simdata
$ plink --bfile original-simulated-plink/simdata --recode --out original-simulated-plink/simdata

# IMPORTANTLY: 
# - (1) The pheno column present in the final version of the .fam files (split per chromosome will have -9 regardless of being cases and controls)
#   - Indeed, our external pheno file will take care of handling phenos (just like it has when using SAIGE statistics)
#   - The reason we still used --simulate-ncontrols and --simulate-ncases is because it seems to be the only way of controlling the final number of participants.
# - (2) I get an error about some options not being compatible with --simulate when I used --recode in the same command so I split the command in 2 steps.

#### 3 - Use R script to update simulated data to obtain matching SNPS with GWAS catalogue data ####

$ Rscript update_simdata.R

#### 4 - Use PLINK to update the simdata a final time ####

# First, ensure seperations are correct
$ cat updated-simulated-plink/update_allele.txt | awk '{print $1"\t"$2 " " $3"\t"$4 " " $5'} > updated-simulated-plink/update_allele-modified.txt

$ plink --file updated-simulated-plink/simdata --update-alleles updated-simulated-plink/update_allele-modified.txt --allow-no-sex --out updated-simulated-plink/simdata-final --make-bed

#### 5 - Use PLINK to split per chromosome and output bed files ####

for i in {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22}
do
    plink \
    --bfile updated-simulated-plink/simdata-final \
    --chr $i \
    --allow-no-sex \
    --out updated-simulated-plink/updated-split/sampleA_chr${i}_simdata-final \
    --make-bed
done
```

Commit message:

updated README.md for making simulated data and updated .gitignore accordingly

testdata/simulated-data/README.md, after:

# Making simulated PLINK data

## 1 - Aim

The purpose of the following is to simulate PLINK genotype files such that:
- The PLINK files have enough SNPS and samples for testing and match the numbers I have in my test phenotype file (`cohort_parsed_file.phe`)
- The PLINK files are split per chromosome
- The PLINK files contain SNPs that will match those found in a GWAS catalogue summary statistics file: this way the pipeline can be appropriately tested.

For the purpose of this testing, the following GWAS catalogue study was chosen (study GCST004420):
```
$ cd testdata
$ mkdir gwas-catalogue-data && cd gwas-catalogue-data
$ wget ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gwas/summary_statistics/Ahola-OlliAV_27989323_GCST004420/harmonised/27989323-GCST004420-EFO_0008082.h.tsv.gz
$ gunzip -d 27989323-GCST004420-EFO_0008082.h.tsv.gz
```

Due to the fact this file is very large (1.2GB), it is not commited to this repository.

## 2 - Software

In order to simulate PLINK files, one can use PLINK1:
https://zzz.bwh.harvard.edu/plink/simulate.shtml

Important considerations:
- All SNPs simulated are unlinked and in linkage equilibrium.
- This tool only generates individuals drawn from a homogeneous population (but see link for tip on how to get around that)
- You can also use PLINK to simulate summary statistics directly

## 3 - Commands used

To produce additional test for this pipeline, the following commands were used:

```
#### 1 -  Obtain PLINK1 docker image ####

$ docker pull lifebitai/plink1:latest

#### 2 -  Make a wgas.sim file and simulate data ####

# Here, we want to simulate 2200 SNPs (100 per chromosome) for 112 individuals (7 cases, 105 controls)
# These numbers should make it easier for me to split the data and use the current pheno file I have used for testing the pipeline.

# Use the Docker image to easily run PLINK
$ pwd
# [...]testdata/simulated-data
$ docker run --rm -it -v "$PWD":"$PWD" -w "$PWD" -e HOME=$PWD” --user "$(id -u):$(id -g)" lifebitai/plink1:latest

$ plink --simulate original-simulated-plink/wgas.sim --simulate-ncases 7 --simulate-ncontrols 105 --out original-simulated-plink/simdata
$ plink --bfile original-simulated-plink/simdata --recode --out original-simulated-plink/simdata

# IMPORTANTLY: 
# - (1) The pheno column present in the final version of the .fam files (split per chromosome will have -9 regardless of being cases and controls)
#   - Indeed, our external pheno file will take care of handling phenos (just like it has when using SAIGE statistics)
#   - The reason we still used --simulate-ncontrols and --simulate-ncases is because it seems to be the only way of controlling the final number of participants.
# - (2) I get an error about some options not being compatible with --simulate when I used --recode in the same command so I split the command in 2 steps.

#### 3 - Use R script to update simulated data to obtain matching SNPS with GWAS catalogue data ####

$ Rscript update_simdata.R

#### 4 - Use PLINK to update the simdata a final time ####

# First, ensure seperations are correct
$ cat updated-simulated-plink/update_allele.txt | awk '{print $1"\t"$2 " " $3"\t"$4 " " $5'} > updated-simulated-plink/update_allele-modified.txt

$ plink --file updated-simulated-plink/simdata --update-alleles updated-simulated-plink/update_allele-modified.txt --allow-no-sex --out updated-simulated-plink/simdata-final --make-bed

#### 5 - Use PLINK to split per chromosome and output bed files ####

for i in {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22}
do
    plink \
    --bfile updated-simulated-plink/simdata-final \
    --chr $i \
    --allow-no-sex \
    --out updated-simulated-plink/updated-split/sampleA_chr${i}_simdata-final \
    --make-bed
done
```
